Washing Machine Firm - Interview Transcript
 
Interviewer: Your client is a washing machine manufacturer who is facing a decline in profits. He wants you to figure out the reason for the same.

Consultant: Profits are a function of revenue and cost. I would like to understand which part of the function is causing a problem.

Interviewer: We have seen a decline in revenues whereas costs are not a problem.

Consultant: Before proceeding further, it would be good to know about the Company, its position in the market, its product mix, and the customer segment it targets. Do we have data on this?

Interviewer: Yes. The company is a market leader in the washing machine segment. It targets middle-class consumers and does not manufacture high-end products.

Consultant: Great. I would like to understand the trend for revenues and profits of the Company for the past 2 years.

Interviewer: Revenue and profits have seen an overall decline of 10%

Consultant: I would like to break the revenue into volume and price to understand the decline in revenues

Interviewer: That seems fair. The decline in revenues is due to a fall in volumes. What will you do next?

Consultant: Having known this, I would like to know the geographical segments the company is operating in. Also, is the issue of decline in volumes company-specific or industry-wide?

Interviewer: The company operates primarily in Western India. The issue is specific only to the company.

Consultant: Okay. Is our product different from the products offered by the competitors in terms of features and price?

Interviewer: The company’s product is superior in terms of quality as compared to competitors, but the price is almost comparable to theirs.

Consultant: If the product is superior in terms of quality and yet comparable in price, and when there is no industry-wide issue, the product should be in demand amongst the consumers. Can I, therefore, assume that the product is not available in sufficient quantity when demanded by customers?

Interviewer: Yes. That’s correct

Consultant: In that case, the company’s distribution channel needs to be analyzed. Do we have data on the distribution channel of the company?

Interviewer: The company sells its products through distributors, who then sell them to retailers and are thereby made available to consumers

Consultant: I would like to assume that the company is facing some problems with its distributors. Is my assumption correct?

Interviewer: Correct. Distributors feel that the margins offered by the Company are less as compared to competitors. Hence, the distributors have gradually reduced the stock offered to retailers. What would you do next?

Consultant: Do we have details on the margins offered by us and by the competitors?

Interviewer: Yes. We offer a 4% margin, whereas competitors offer 7% margins. How will you solve this problem?

Consultant: Can we consider increasing the margin for distributors and absorbing the increased expense in our income statement?

Interviewer: Consider the following data and then decide:
Particulars | FY2017 | FY2019
Units Sold | 100,000 | 90,000
Price to dealer | 18,000 | 18,000
Expense per unit | 14,000 | 14,000
Assume that the number of units sold will be back to the original levels if the margin is made comparable to competitors.

Consultant: Based on the numbers, the Company made a profit of INR 40 Crs in FY 2017 and INR 36 Crs in FY 2019. In case the price is reduced by offering a margin of 7%, the revised price shall be approximately INR 17,400. The resultant profit shall be INR 34 Crs. That would mean we would be worse off than the current situation if margins were increased.

Interviewer: Yes.

Consultant: Do we have data on the number of distributors and their geographical spread, along with the approximate number of retailers and their geographical spread?

Interviewer: Currently, the Company has 5 distributors. 2 distributors handle the Gujarat region, while the remaining 3 handle the Maharashtra region. There are 200 retailers in the Western region, with 50 in Gujarat and 150 in Maharashtra. All the retailers are widely spread across the two states.

Consultant: Also, is the Company exploring any other distribution channels, such as e-commerce?

Interviewer: The company itself has a minimal presence on e-commerce portals. The products are often sold by distributors on such portals.

Consultant: In this case, I would like to give two recommendations: One, the Company can start transacting with retailers directly. In this situation, the company can decide to hire a factoring agent who can take up the task of collecting from retailers and invoicing them regularly. The company would also have to re-look at its distribution channel and look at the most optimized logistics strategy. Secondly, the company starts selling its products directly on e-commerce portals and thereby moves lost sales from distributors on such portals.

Interviewer: Good job!